[liteparse] extract: 122.1ms (8 pages)
[liteparse] ocr render: 280.1ms (6 pages)
[liteparse] ocr: 4110.2ms
[liteparse] project: 9.4ms
[liteparse] total: 4522.4ms
    Finance Research Letters 59 (2024) 104786

  Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

          Finance Research Letters

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/frl




    Can ChatGPT assist in picking stocks?        pe
    Matthias Pelster ∗, Joel Val
    Mercator School of Management, Duisburg-Essen University & european center for financial services (ecfs), Lotharstraße
    65, 47057, Duisburg, Germany


A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T

JEL classification: This paper studies whether ChatGPT-4 with access to the internet is able to provide valuable in-
G12 vestment advice and evaluate financial information in a timely manner. Using a live experiment,
G14 we find a positive correlation between ChatGPT-4 ratings and future earnings announcements
G17 and stock returns. We find evidence that ChatGPT-4 adjusts ratings in response to earnings
Keywords: surprises and news events information in a timely manner. An investment strategy based on
Information processing ''attractiveness ratings'' by ChatGPT-4 yields positive returns.
Artificial intelligence (AI)
ChatGPT



1. Introduction

   In financial markets, news are of pivotal importance. News information provide the necessary data for investors to determine
the intrinsic value of assets and make sound investment decisions. However, the sheer volume of (possibly conflicting) information
in today's information age may be too much for investors to evaluate thoroughly (Kahneman, 1973; Hirshleifer and Teoh, 2003).
This is especially true for individual investors who, compared to institutional investors, often face greater constraints in terms of
time and technology (Barber and Odean, 2008).
   ChatGPT, an advanced artificial intelligence (AI) language model, emerges as a potentially beneficial tool for investors. By
leveraging its natural language processing (NLP) capabilities, ChatGPT can potentially exploit patterns observed in the past to distill
large volumes of information into concise summaries, thereby aiding investors in efficiently sifting through the plethora of news and
data. ChatGPT can provide responses to specific queries and facilitate an interactive and tailored exchange that aligns with investors'
needs. As the technology is available for all types of investors, it has the potential to lower information costs and to democratize
financial knowledge and increase the capacity of individual investors to formulate well-informed investment decisions.
   In this study, we evaluate ChatGPT's ability to synthesize financial news and explore its accuracy in determining actionable
investment insights. We conduct a live experiment around the 2023-Q2 earnings announcement period to test whether ChatGPT
reliably evaluates earnings surprises and other news events. Earnings announcements are a natural choice for our tests. They are
scheduled major corporate events and create information-rich environments that harbor complexity and subtlety which is often
challenging for investors to evaluate (Noh and Zhou, 2022; Rennekamp et al., 2022; Allee et al., 2021). Using a live experiment is
important to avoid biased results. Specifically, it is impossible to analyze the performance of ChatGPT using historical data as it is
not possible to make sure that ChatGPT does not use ''future'' data to make recommendations in such instances.
   Our results indicate that earnings forecasts issued by ChatGPT are positively correlated to actual earnings, after we control for
consensus forecasts. ''Attractiveness'' ratings positively correlate to future stock returns. Moreover, we find evidence that suggests
that ChatGPT reacts to news information in a timely manner.


    ∗ Corresponding author.
    E-mail address: matthias.pelster@uni-due.de (M. Pelster).

    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.frl.2023.104786
    Received 15 October 2023; Received in revised form 13 November 2023; Accepted 21 November 2023
    Available online 23 November 2023
    1544-6123/© 2023 The Authors.      Published by Elsevier Inc.  This is an open access article under the CC BY license
    (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

M. Pelster and J. Val Finance Research Letters 59 (2024) 104786

   Studying earnings announcement forecasts and stock attractiveness ratings, we explore two use cases that lend themselves to
investors employing ChatGPT as a supporting tool in their decision-making processes. The literature finds that positive (negative)
surprises result in positive (negative) cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) over several months after the announcement (Ali et al.,
2020; Doyle et al., 2006; Milian, 2015). Investors may ask ChatGPT to assist in the selection of stocks to invest prior to earnings
announcements. This holds in the more general case of stock attractiveness ratings as well. There are cognitive-and temporal-
limits to how much information investors can process. It is far easier, for example, to thoroughly consider an investment set of
pre-selected alternatives than the complete universe of stocks.
   We make an important contribution to the literature on ChatGPT's use-cases in finance (e.g., Dowling and Lucey, 2023; Fieberg
et al., 2023; Niszczota and Abbas, 2023). By providing tutoring-like support and helping to interpret data in a conversational manner,
ChatGPT and similar technologies are likely to affect the decision-making processes of investors. The rapid integration of ChatGPT
and similar technologies in various industries suggests that, in the future, people will more rely on information that has been
retrieved, summarized, and analyzed by AI. Financial institutions are already working on implementations that assist customers and
employees in extracting and interpreting information (Bautzer and Nguyen, 2023). Our findings suggest that the technology may
already be helpful in that regard.

2. What is ChatGPT?

   ChatGPT, based on OpenAI's GPT-4 architecture, is a state-of-the-art NLP designed to generate human-like text based on given
prompts. The model is built upon the transformer architecture introduced by Vaswani et al. (2017) and leverages a deep learning
approach with several layers of attention mechanisms to process and generate language. Due to its vast training data and advanced
architecture, ChatGPT excels at multiple applications such as content generation, translation, and even complex tasks like code
writing (Brown et al., 2020).
   In Finance, large language models (LLMs) can be used in automated customer support, financial analysis, fraud detection,
algorithmic trading, personal finance management, regulatory compliance, education, or consulting (Cucchiara, 2023). Given the
wide range of applications, it is not surprising that Morgan Stanley is already employing ChatGPT in its wealth management
business (Bautzer and Nguyen, 2023). In the context of investments, Fieberg et al. (2023) argue that ''publicly available information
is the key driver of predictable asset price movements, which implies that AI applications such as GPT-4 may be particularly well-
equipped to adjust portfolio allocation advice to the arrival of new information.'' OpenAI's efforts to integrate a browsing function
may significantly change ChatGPT's abilities in this field, as current information from the web bypasses ChatGPT's knowledge cutoff
in September 2021.1
   Considering the vast array of information that needs to be evaluated and the limited attention of investors (Hirshleifer and
Teoh, 2003), leveraging LLMs to assist in the information processing could be a game-changer in investment management. However,
ChatGPT's responses are generated based on patterns observed in its training data, making it vulnerable to producing misinformation
if presented with ambiguous or misleading prompts (Lipton and Steinhardt, 2018). It does not ''understand'' information in the
human sense, rather it regurgitates patterns it has learned. This can sometimes lead to outputs that are plausible-sounding but
factually incorrect.2 Additionally, while the model can generate text on a wide range of topics, its depth of expertise on specific,
nuanced subjects may vary, often reflecting the distribution and quality of its training data. To summarize, the potential strengths of
the model to evaluate financial information comes from its ability to observe patterns in past data (the training data) and to apply
these patterns to current information. If the same or very similar patterns lead to different outcomes, then the evaluation leads to
misleading recommendations.

3. Related literature

   Research on ChatGPT in financial contexts is still in its infancy. A few studies investigate whether ChatGPT can potentially
assist portfolio construction. Ko and Lee (2023) focus on asset classes and find that ChatGPT's selections are better diversified and
outperform random portfolios. Lopez-Lira and Tang (2023) use ChatGPT to assess the sentiment of single stock news headlines and
find that portfolios based on ChatGPT sentiment scores outperform portfolios based on other LLMs such as BERT. Smales (2023)
studies whether ChatGPT is able to classify monetary policy decisions made by the Reserve Bank of Australia.
   Niszczota and Abbas (2023) investigate whether GPT can serve as a financial robo-advisor. The authors show that ChatGPT
based on GPT-4 achieves a near-perfect 99% score in a financial literacy test which is a significant improvement over previous
versions. Fieberg et al. (2023) design hypothetical investor profiles varying in their risk tolerance, age, and investment horizon. For
those investors, the authors then ask ChatGPT to recommend a portfolio composition. They conclude that GPT's suggestions reflect
an investor's individual circumstances such as their risk tolerance, risk capacity, and sustainability preferences but are insensitive
to the investment horizon. Nevertheless, they conclude that the historical risk-adjusted performance is on par with a professionally
managed benchmark portfolio.
   Unlike the existing literature, we run a live experiment to examine a version of ChatGPT that autonomously browses the
internet and weighs the relevance of the obtained information for its responses. We explore ChatGPT's performance in processing
time-sensitive information and ranking stocks, which is a common practice of investors to navigate the vast array of investment
options.


    1 At the time of our experiment, the OpenAI's browsing feature is still in beta and not available for ChatGPT users.
    2 Compared to previous versions, GPT-4 reduces the probability of hallucination, i.e., that the language model generates random answers not in line with
    reality.

        2

M. Pelster and J. Val                                                         Finance Research Letters 59 (2024) 104786

« Earnings               surprise   prompt: Please evaluate all  recent   information     up     to       today—note
  that  this            information includes relevant news outlets such   as             the Wall Street Journal but
  also investment-specific chat     groups     such   as   Reddit —    on                       COMPANY NAME (TICKER
  SYMBOL). Based                 on this information, please provide a           rating for the next earnings report
  on a  scale            from -5 to +5. Do  you expect this earnings     report     to     under-     or overperform
  the current analyst        forecasts?     -5 indicates significant   underperformance, 0 indicates              an
  expected report in line with expectations,               and +5 indicates significant outperformance.

«Attractiveness prompt:      Based     on     the     available  information as of     today,     how do     you as-
  sess  the relative attractiveness                                    of COMPANY NAME (TICKER SYMBOL) for investors
  intending              to hold this stock in the following month?      Compare the     stock     to     all  other
  S&P 500                stocks and assign  a score on a  scale  from -5 to  +5,     where -5     indicates     very
  unattractive,             0 indicates average attractiveness,  and +5 indicates     very     attractive.

Fig. 1. ChatGPT prompts.
The figure summarizes the main prompt to collect earnings surprise and attractiveness ratings from ChatGPT.


Table 1
Summary statistics of ChatGPT's stock ratings.
                                          Mean     Std      Min     25%                                           50%    75%     Max
ChatGPT attractiveness rating             1.33     1.46    -5.0     0.5                                           1.0    2.0     5.0
ChatGPT earnings surprise rating          1.13     1.60    -5.0     0.0                                           1.0    2.0     5.0
The table reports summary statistics for ChatGPT earnings announcement ratings and ChatGPT attractiveness ratings.


4. Methodology

            We study whether ChatGPT can support investors in making informed investment decisions. It is impossible to answer this
question using historical data as it is not possible to make sure that ChatGPT does not use ''future'' data to make recommendations
in backward looking analyses (look-ahead bias). Therefore, we conduct a live experiment. The setting of our tests is the 2023-Q2
earnings season. Between July 5, 2023 and September 8, 2023, we run two separate queries and ask ChatGPT to forecast the earnings
announcement and evaluate the relative attractiveness of each S&P 500 firm. We summarize our prompts in Fig. 1.
           Out-of-the-box, ChatGPT's knowledge is limited to information available up until September 2021 and it cannot browse the
internet. Thus, it cannot provide responses to prompts that-like ours-require knowledge beyond that date. We insert additional
information from a web search engine into our prompts to overcome this limitation. While such a browsing functionality is not
yet supported by ChatGPT, OpenAI is already working on a similar approach. Thus, the ChatGPT responses we obtain are likely to
resemble those obtained from future versions of ChatGPT.
                 We write an application that automatizes the Chrome web browser and loads the Web-ChatGPT extension. WebChatGPT is
a third-party tool that interfaces with search engines to obtain relevant search results, combines prompts with the information
obtained from the web, and asks ChatGPT for a response based on the newly acquired information. On a given date, our program
iterates through the S&P 500 stocks and starts a conversation with ChatGPT by entering either our earnings surprise prompt or our
attractiveness prompt. At this point, the WebChatGPT extension halts ChatGPT, opens a separate browser session in the background,
and asks ChatGPT to formulate a Yahoo search query which is likely to retrieve relevant information for our prompt. Based on this
query, the program obtains the URLs of the top ten Yahoo search results within the last four weeks. For each URL, the application
crawls its contents, opens separate browser sessions in the background, and asks ChatGPT to generate content summaries of the
websites. The summaries are then fed into a modified version of our original prompt as summarized in Fig. 2.
          Our analysis is based on ChatGPT's responses to the modified prompt. We use Refinitiv Eikon to obtain the list of S&P 500
constituents and market-related, fundamental, and IBES analyst data. We obtain daily news volume and news sentiment scores from
Bloomberg.

5. Results

    We first describe the ratings that ChatGPT issues for earnings announcements and attractiveness. Table 1 shows that the average
earnings announcement and attractiveness ratings are both positive, with a mean (median) of 1.13 (1) and 1.33 (1), respectively.
Over our sample period, ChatGPT makes use of the complete range of possible ratings. However, the range of ratings varies over
time. Fig. 3 shows that ChatGPT uses the full range of possible ratings only in the second half of our sample period. Initially,
especially (very) low ratings are not used.

3

 M. Pelster and J. Val                                                  Finance Research Letters 59 (2024) 104786

 Forget   all     previous    instructions.     Pretend to be  an   investment  professional. I   will  give
 you a    question        or  an instruction.   Your objective is   to answer   my question   or fulfill  my
 instruction.
 My question     or       instruction is:    [placeholder for earnings surprise prompt   or   attractiveness
 prompt]
 For   your         reference, today’s date is  [placeholder for date and tim
 It’s  pc     ible    that the   question   or  instruction, or  just  a portion of it,  requires   relevant
 information from          the   internet to give a  satisfactory   answer or     complete  the  task.   I'm
 providing     you      with the necessary             information already obtained from the internet below.
 This sets the context for addressing the           question  or fulfilling the instruction,  so you   don’t
 need to  access     the internet to answer     my   question    or fulfill my instruction. Write a    reply
 to the given question or        instruction using the information provided below in the best            way
 you can.
 A strict requirement for        you is   to only provide the score.     Do not  use      complete sentences
and do not provide additional explanations or other content.
Now, reply to the given question or instruction with this information:
 nn

 NUMBER:[Placeholder for the ID of the Yahoo search result]
 URL: [Placeholder for the URL]
 TITLE: [Placeholder for         the title    of the website]
 CONTENT: [Placeholder for the summarized content of the website]

 nn

 Fig. 2. Modified prompt.
 The figure summarizes the modified prompt to collect earnings surprise and attractiveness ratings, combined with information that WebChatGPT obtains from
 Yahoo web search results.


       (a) Earnings surprise                                        (b) Attractiveness





 forecast
 eamings
 of
 Range








                                                                    owe.

 Fig. 3. Min-max plot of ChatGPT ratings.
 The figure shows the minimum and maximum ChatGPT rating scores about a stock's earnings surprise forecast (Panel a) and a stock's relative attractiveness
 (Panel b) for each week between 2023-07-05 and 2023-09-08.

 4

    M. Pelster and J. Val    Finance Research Letters 59 (2024) 104786


               Earnings surprise                                                         News sentiment
         Le                                                                               sitive
               — Negative                       16                                       —

    214

                                               H

    £10                                        512
    H                                          H
                                               Sis
                                               2
    5                                          Sos
         os

         02                                     0s

               T=     I        p        3                                                             o       T    z    3
                          Days to event                                                         Days to event

                 (a) Earnings announcements                                                  (b) News events

    Fig. 4. ChatGPT rating changes in response to earnings announcements and news events.
    The figure shows the response of ChatGPT attractiveness ratings to positive and negative earnings surprises (Panel a) and to positive and negative news events
    (Panel b). ChatGPT attractiveness ratings range from -5 to +5 and evaluate the relative desirability of investing in a particular company's stock over the next
    month in comparison to all other S&P 500 stocks, with -5 indicating a very unattractive investment, 0 indicating an average level of attractiveness, and +5
    indicating a very attractive investment opportunity. Earnings surprises are defined as the average deviation between analyst EPS consensus forecasts and actual
    EPS relative to the stock price. News events are defined as days where the number of news articles is three standard deviations above the mean number of news
    articles over the past 30 days. Bloomberg news sentiment scores determine positive or negative news events.





    Table 2
    GPT-4 earnings forecasts and earnings announcements.
                             (1)                        (2)                                           (3)           (4)           (5)
    Sample                   Full                       Full                                          Full          Low SD        High SD
    Dep. var.                EPS Actual
    (Intercept)              0.0152                     -0.0007                                       -0.0008       0.0009        -0.0019
                             (21.1269)                  (-2.1106)                                     (-2.6442)     (3.1633)      (-3.1002)
    Rating GPT               0.0000                     0.0003                                        0.0003        -0.0002       0.0007
                             (0.1056)                   (2.5873)                                      (2.5773)      (-1.8410)     (3.3482)
    EPS forecast (mean)                                 1.0706                                                      0.9997        1.1144
                                                        (64.1391)                                                   (63.8086)     (41.4585)
    EPS forecast (median)                                                                             1.0866
                                                                                                      (68.3991)
    Obs.                     459                        459                                           459           235           224
    Adj. R2                  -0.0022                    0.8998                                        0.9108        0.9456        0.8851

    The table presents the results of regressions on actual earnings (EPS Actual). We regress the last GPT-4 earnings announcement rating before each announcement
    (Rating GPT) on actual earnings. EPS forecast denotes the mean (median) analyst forecast for the announcement. Columns (1)-(3) report regressions on the full
    sample; Column (4) includes stocks with below median standard deviation of analyst forecasts; Column (5) includes stocks with above median standard deviation
    of analyst forecasts. Analyst forecast data is from IBES. -statistics are reported in parentheses.



    Table 2 summarizes correlations between GPT-4 earnings forecasts and actual earnings using cross-sectional OLS regressions.
Column 1 indicates that we do not find any correlation between earnings forecasts and earnings. However, after controlling for
analyst forecasts, we find a positive correlation between GPT ratings and actual earnings (Columns 2 and 3, -values < 0.01). Note
that we explicitly ask ChatGPT to provide earnings forecasts beyond current analyst forecasts (''Do you expect this earnings report
to under- or overperform the current analyst forecasts?''). Our results indicate that ChatGPT is able to execute that task.
    In columns 4 and 5, we separately investigate earnings announcements with low and high dispersion in analyst forecasts, as
measured by the standard deviation (SD) of analyst forecasts. We find that the rating of ChatGPT significantly correlates with actual
earnings in particular for high dispersion analyst forecasts ( ≈ 0.01).
    Next, we investigate whether ChatGPT can provide valuable assistance in evaluating the vast amount of information on particular
stocks. Fig. 4 shows the reaction of ChatGPT attractiveness ratings to earnings announcements in particular and to news in general. In
Panel a, we focus on earnings announcements. We plot the average attractiveness rating for positive and negative earnings surprises.
We define earnings surprises as the average deviation between analyst EPS consensus forecasts and actual EPS relative to the
stock price. Noteworthy is the clear distinction between positive and negative earnings announcements. Stocks that exhibit positive
earnings surprises receive significantly higher attractiveness ratings compared to stocks that realize negative earnings surprises.

        5

    M. Pelster and J. Val    Finance Research Letters 59 (2024) 104786


    ChatGPT attractiveness.    ChatGPT attractiveness
    —  Upvote                  — Upvote
    —  Downvote                — Downvate





    5%
    cars

125




    175



    Days to event        Days to event

    (a) Market model (VW)        (b)     Market model (EW)

    Fig. 5. Event study on ChatGPT attractiveness rating changes.
    The figure shows the cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) around significant changes in ChatGPT attractiveness ratings on date   . A significant rating change
    is determined by a change in ratings of at least 4 scores. CARs are computed within event window [ - 7, + 7] and are based on a market model estimated in
    [- 259, - 10]. In Panel a, abnormal returns are based on value-weighted S&P 500 index returns (VW). In Panel b, abnormal returns are based on equal-weighted
    S&P 500 returns (EW). Shaded areas indicate 95%-confidence intervals using standard errors averaged across events and firms.




    Table 3
    Portfolio sorts using ChatGPT attractiveness ratings.
                   Least attractive                      2         3          4         Most attractive   5-1
    Mean return    -0.15                                 -0.08     -0.11      -0.07     -0.08             0.07
                   (-13.74)                              (-7.87)   (-10.82)   (-6.18)   (-6.57)           (4.35)
    Sharpe ratio   -0.26                                 -0.13     -0.16      -0.10     -0.13             0.17

    The table shows daily average returns (in %) for the next 30 days following ChatGPT's attractiveness rating together with the Sharpe ratios of rating quintile
    portfolios. Quintile portfolios are formed at the end of each week within our sample period and are based on the weekly average attractiveness rating provided
    by ChatGPT. -statistics are reported in parentheses.



Moreover, ChatGPT significantly adjusts its attractiveness ratings following negative earnings surprises by approximately half a
point. We do not observe an adjustment to positive earnings surprises.
    Panel b of Fig. 4 studies the more general case of news events. Again, we observe the clear distinction between positive and
negative news events, as measured by Bloomberg news sentiment scores. Interestingly, ChatGPT adjusts ratings for negative news
events immediately before the news event, which may be explained by news leakages or rumors. Overall, these results provide
evidence in support of the notion that ChatGPT is able to evaluate news, at least to some degree.
    Next, we study stock returns around large rating changes. Fig. 5 summarizes the results of an event study on changes in ChatGPT's
attractiveness ratings of at least 4 points. While we do not observe statistically significant differences between positive changes in
the attractiveness ratings (upvotes) and negative changes in the attractiveness ratings (downvotes), on average, the spread between
abnormal stock returns of upvotes and downvotes widens and the standard deviation of abnormal stock returns increases. As the
spread begins to open at = -2, it seems that ChatGPT adjusts its ratings in response to the stock market.
    Finally, we turn to the relationship between GPT's attractiveness ratings and future stock returns and Sharpe ratios. Every time
we collect attractiveness ratings, we form portfolios based on those ratings. Then, we calculate the returns (Sharpe ratios) of those
equally-weighted portfolios over the next 30 days. We plot the average next-month returns of those portfolios in Fig. 6. While the
portfolio with the highest ratings provides lower returns at the beginning of our sample period, higher rated portfolios yield higher
returns in particular towards the end of our sample period (see also Fig. 7) and over the full sample period, on average (see Table 3).
Fig. 7 visualizes the results of simple cross-sectional OLS regressions that we run every time we collect attractiveness ratings. We
regress stock returns (Sharpe ratios) over the next 30 days on the attractiveness ratings and plot the estimated coefficients together
with 95%-confidence intervals.

6. Discussion

    LLMs have aroused enormous interest lately. The rapid integration of LLMs and similar technologies in various industries
highlight the hopes and expectations placed in these technologies. In this paper, we consider the use of such technologies in the
field of investment. We study whether ChatGPT can provide valuable assistance in the processing of information and the selection
of stocks.

        6

    M. Pelster and J. Val    Finance Research Letters 59 (2024) 104786



    Avg. returns by rating    Avg. Sharpe ratio by rating




    Tal










    Portola + 1 + 2 + 3 = 4 +        +     1     + 2     + 3      +
    (a) Return forecasts        (b)     Sharpe ratio forecasts

    Fig. 6. Avg. next-month returns of portfolios based on ChatGPT-4 ratings.
    The figure shows the average next-month returns (Panel A, together with the next-month return of an investment into the S&P) and Sharpe ratios (Panel B) of
    4 portfolios formed according to ChatGPT-4 attractiveness ratings. Every time ChatGPT attractiveness ratings are collected, portfolios are formed based on the
    attractiveness scores. Portfolio 1 includes stocks with an attractiveness rating ≤ -3, portfolio 2 includes ratings > -3 and ≤ 0, portfolio 3 includes ratings > 0
    and ≤ 3, and portfolio 4 includes ratings > 3. Portfolios have to include at least 5 stocks. We then plot the equal-weighted average of portfolio returns (Sharpe
    ratios) over the next 30 days. Dates show the time of portfolio formation.









    Next month return ~ ChatGPT—4 attractiveness    Next month Sharpe ratio- ChalGPT—4 attractiveness.










    g , L L    =
        EES     RSE










    its    mis    sire    aor  ngs    shor


        (a) Return forecasts (b) Sharpe ratio forecasts

Fig. 7. Correlations between ChatGPT attractiveness ratings and future stock returns.
The figure plots coefficients of an OLS regression of next-month returns (Panel A) and next-month Sharpe ratios (Panel B) on ChatGPT-4 attractiveness ratings
together with 95%-confidence intervals. Every time ChatGPT attractiveness ratings are collected, we run one cross-sectional regression of stock returns (Sharpe
ratios) over the next 30 days on the attractiveness ratings. Dates show the time of ratings collection.


    7

M. Pelster and J. Val Finance Research Letters 59 (2024) 104786

    In a live experiment, we find that ratings of stocks by ChatGPT positively correlate to future (out-of-sample) stock returns. If the
market is at least weakly efficient and ChatGPT would assign ratings to stocks randomly, all portfolios based on those ratings should
provide approximately the same return, a zero abnormal return, on average. However, our results indicate that the assignment of
ratings to stocks is not random. Instead, ChatGPT seems to be able to successfully identify stocks that yield superior performance
over the next month.
    ChatGPT-4 seems to have some ability to evaluate news information and summarize its evaluation into a simple score. We find
clear evidence that ChatGPT is able to distinguish between positive and negative news events, and adjusts its recommendation
following negative news.
    Notwithstanding our results, we advice caution in using such technologies for investment decisions without thoroughly reviewing
the suggestions. LLMs like ChatGPT do not deliver complete factual accuracy. Factual accuracy increases over time; however, both
our results and the previous literature (Chen et al., 2023) show that the performance of, for example, ChatGPT varies over time.
Thus, LLMs, like ChatGPT, might not always provide accurate or reliable financial advice.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

    Matthias Pelster: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing. Joel
Val: Conceptualization, Methodology, Data curation, Formal analysis, Visualization, Writing - original draft, Writing - review &
editing.

Data availability

    Data will be made available on request.

References

Ali, Ashiq, Chen, Xuanjuan, Yao, Tong, Yu, Tong, 2020. Can mutual funds profit from post earnings announcement drift? The role of competition. J. Bank.
    Financ. 114, 105774.
Allee, Kristian D., Do, Chuong, Sterin, Mikhail, 2021. Product market competition, disclosure framing, and casting in earnings conference calls. J. Account. Econ.
    72 (1), 101405.
Barber, Brad M., Odean, Terrance, 2008. All that glitters: The effect of attention and news on the buying behavior of individual and institutional investors. Rev.
    Financ. Stud. 21 (2), 785-818.
Bautzer, Tatiana, Nguyen, Lananh, 2023. Morgan Stanley to launch AI chatbot to woo wealthy. Thomson Reuters, https://www.reuters.com/technology/morgan-
    stanley-launch-ai-chatbot-woo-wealthy-2023-09-07. (Accessed 12 November 2023).
Brown, Tom B., Mann, Benjamin, Ryder, Nick, Subbiah, Melvin, Kaplan, Jared, Dhariwal, Prafulla, Neelakantan, Arvind, Shyam, Pranav, Sastry, Girish,
    Askell, Amanda, et al., 2020. Language models are few-shot learners. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Vol. 33.
Chen, Lingjiao, Zaharia, Matei, Zou, James, 2023. How is ChatGPT's behavior changing over time? arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09009.
Cucchiara, Rita, 2023. What large language models like GPT can do for finance. Nature Italy.
Dowling, Michael, Lucey, Brian, 2023. ChatGPT for (Finance) research: The Bananarama conjecture. Finance Res. Lett. 53, 103662.
Doyle, Jeffrey T., Lundholm, Russell J., Soliman, Mark T., 2006. The extreme future stock returns following I/B/E/S earnings surprises. J. Account. Res. 44 (5),
    849-887.
Fieberg, Christian, Hornuf, Lars, Streich, David J., 2023. Using GPT-4 for financial advice. In: SSRN Working Paper.
Hirshleifer, David, Teoh, Siew Hong, 2003. Limited attention, information disclosure, and financial reporting. J. Account. Econ. 36 (1), 337-386.
Kahneman, Daniel, 1973. Attention and Effort. Prentice Hall.
Ko, Hyungjin, Lee, Jaewook, 2023. Can ChatGPT improve investment decision? From a portfolio management perspective. In: SSRN Working Paper.
Lipton, Zachary C., Steinhardt, Jacob, 2018. Troubling trends in machine learning scholarship. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03341.
Lopez-Lira, Alejandro, Tang, Yuehua, 2023. Can ChatGPT forecast stock price movements? Return predictability and large language models. In: SSRN Working
    Paper.
Milian, Jonathan A., 2015. Unsophisticated arbitrageurs and market efficiency: Overreacting to a history of underreaction? J. Account. Res. 53 (1), 175-220.
Niszczota, Pawel, Abbas, Sami, 2023. GPT has become financially literate: Insights from financial literacy tests of GPT and a preliminary test of how people use
    it as a source of advice. Finance Res. Lett. 58, 104333.
Noh, Joonki, Zhou, Dexin, 2022. Executives' Blaming external factors and market reactions: Evidence from earnings conference calls. J. Bank. Financ. 134,
    106358.
Rennekamp, Kristina M., Sethuraman, Mani, Steenhoven, Blake A., 2022. Engagement in earnings conference calls. J. Account. Econ. 74 (1), 101498.
Smales, Lee A., 2023. Classification of RBA monetary policy announcements using ChatGPT. Finance Res. Lett. 58, 104514. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.frl.2023.
    104514.
Vaswani, Ashish, Shazeer, Noam, Parmar, Niki, Uszkoreit, Jakob, Jones, Llion, Gomez, Aidan N., Kaiser, Łukasz, Polosukhin, Illia, 2017. Attention is all you
    need. In: Guyon, I., Luxburg, U. Von, Bengio, S., Wallach, H., Fergus, R., Vishwanathan, S., Garnett, R. (Eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing
    Systems, Vol. 30. Curran Associates, Inc..










    8